>>Digging deep is the
hallmark of science journalist
Graham Hancock, who has
sold over five million books
featuring his scientific
research into the mysteries
of the ancient
structures and texts,
archaeoastronomy, and beyond.
Now he's delving into the
ultimate mystery and the least
understood, that of
the spirit world.
His journey took
him to Brazil, where
he drank from the ayahuasca
cup with the elder shamans.
Well, where to begin?
We could start in
the jungles of Peru,
where you began exploring
the subject of, in essence,
expanded consciousness
through the root.
Would you call it
a root, a vine?
>>A vine.
They call it the Vine of Souls.
>>The Vine of Souls.
>>Ayahuasca.
And the reason that I
came to this substance
was because I wanted
to investigate
a mystery in human history.
It's very clear from
the evidence that
the art of the painted caves
of upper Paleolithic Europe,
about 35,000 years ago down
to about 10,000 years ago,
and the art of, for example,
the sand bushmen of Southern
Africa, which also
goes back 27,000 years,
is an art of altered
state of consciousness.
These artists were
putting themselves
into an altered state either
using plant hallucinogens
or using other techniques like
prolonged rhythmic dancing.
And they were then
painting the visions
that they saw in this altered
state of consciousness.
Now, I've always
believed as a writer
that if I'm going to
explore a subject,
I must explore it personally.
I must put myself
into that story.
And for that reason,
I felt if I was
going to write about the role of
altered states of consciousness
in human culture
and human history,
I had to experience
those states for myself.
And it so happens that there's
a very ancient shamanic culture
in the Amazon.
It goes back at
least 10,000 years,
which makes use of this
extraordinary beverage,
ayahuasca , which is in fact
a mixture of two plants.
One of them is a vine.
And the other is a
leaf that contains
the potent hallucinogen DMT.
And when mixed together, they
produce extraordinary effects.
So I went to the Amazon to
drink Ayahuasca with the shamans
there.
>>And you didn't go
on an overnighter.
You spent a few weeks there.
>>I spent five
weeks in the Amazon.
And I wanted to get
into this in depth.
The ayahuasca experience
is extremely potent.
And it's physically
very, very demanding.
So it's not something that
you want to do every day.
So I spread my 11
experiences of ayahuasca
out over a period of five weeks.
It makes you very ill
when you drink it.
You have have severe vomiting.
You have diarrhea as well.
And you just have
to deal with this.
It's very difficult
for Westerners
to deal with these things.
>>And it tastes, I
heard you say, something
like a frog ground up. [LAUGHS]
>>Yes.
If you could imagine
putting a toad in a blender
and then drinking
it, this is how
one might imagine that
Ayahuasca would taste.
>>So far it sounds appealing.
Can we go back for a moment
to the historical roots
of why you decided you wanted to
explore with this consciousness
and what the original
inspiration was starting--
dating back, say, 40,000 years
ago I think I've heard you say?
>>Well, the original
inspiration in my case
was an intention to explore
the mystery of human origins.
But as I started to look into
the mystery of human origins--
and we have what you can
call the human career
from the last common
ancestor with the chimpanzee
around six million years ago.
As I started to
investigate this material,
I found that most of the story
is incredibly dull, really
very, very boring,
that our ancestors,
as their anatomical
forms slowly,
slowly changed towards
the modern form,
behaved for millions
and millions of years
in an incredibly dull
and uninteresting manner,
with no creativity,
no symbolism,
no evidence whatsoever
of a spiritual life.
These were simply
tool-using apes.
And even as they
looked exactly like us,
which happened about
200,000 years ago, when
full anatomical modernity
was reached, when
the human brain was the same
size and the same structure
as the brains that
we have today,
our behavior still
did not change.
And it remained dull
and uninteresting
with no creativity
and no innovation.
And it's not until
40,000 years ago it
seems like a light has been
turned on all around the world.
And suddenly the whole
suite of behavior
that we recognize as human
is introduced all at once.
And what is key to
this change, what
seems to symbolize it and
sum it up and express it,
is the dawn of art,
the birth of art,
and the first great
art of the world.
There had never been art before.
And suddenly, in upper
Paleolithic Europe
around 35,000 years ago, you
get the most extraordinary art
being painted.
And this rapidly is
found all over the world.
So it is really
as though a light
has been switched on
in the human mind.
The brain was there, but
it wasn't being used.
Something happened that
led to it being used.
And I believe--
it's a long story.
We can't go into
it in detail here.
But the evidence is
compelling that what happened
was that our
ancestors discovered
altered states of consciousness.
They may have come across
hallucinogenic plants
by chance.
They may have thought
they were food items.
And then when they
consumed them,
it brought about a radical
transformation in the way
that they looked at the world.
And it changed everything
about being human.
So this, I felt, was
the crucial, the vital,
before and after moment
in the human story.
It's connected to altered
states of consciousness.
It's connected to the
use plant hallucinogens.
And that's why I
had to investigate
this subject this way.
>>Before we get into
your personal experience
and the things that you
saw, one of the things
I find interesting that you've
lectured about, and coming out
in your book "Supernatural," is
that the same type of imagery
seems to have surfaced
around the globe,
again, in these ancient times.
How do you explain
the types of-- How
do you explain the similarity
in this type of imagery
with people who theoretically
had no means of communication?
>>Yeah.
This is one of the
extraordinary mysteries.
And it's the mystery
that I found myself
confronting most closely
in this research.
It's difficult enough if you
get 20 people together in a room
and have them
witness some event.
It's difficult enough
to get them all
to agree on what they've seen.
We know this from
psychological studies.
If 10 different people
witness a crime,
they will give 10
different descriptions
of the perpetrator.
But here's the bizarre
thing-- in experiences
that our scientists
define as non-real,
or illusory, the experiences
that we call hallucinations,
in those experiences,
people all over the world
universally report
the same experiences.
And that is the experience
of passing through
into another realm, which is
absolutely real, convincingly,
seamlessly real,
which is inhabited
by intelligent beings
who seem to want
to communicate with you.
And these beings
often take the form
of half-animal,
half-human hybrids.
And overlaid against the
perception of these beings,
there are often geometrical
patterns, grids, zigzags.
Wavy lines appear as well.
And this is universal.
It's found from people
from all different cultures
and at all different
periods of history.
It's documented in the painted
caves from 35,000 years ago,
this same experience that
people in modern lab research
using hallucinogens to
investigate human consciousness
report encountering, exactly
the same kind of beings,
the half-human,
half-animal hybrids,
for example, that
we find painted
on the walls of the
caves 35,000 years ago.
>>So this begins explaining
some of the shamanic traditions.
And it also--
>>What it really
tells us is that we
must try to explain why it
is that people experience
the same thing in the
supposedly non-real realm.
And one possible explanation
for it-- and that's
the explanation that shamans
all over the world offer--
is that that other
realm that we enter
in an altered state of
consciousness is, in fact,
real.
And that is why people
see the same things.
Because they're going
to the same places.
They're projecting
their consciousness
into the same places.
And this is what
shamans believe.
And the shamanic view of
the universe and of reality
is radically different from
the view of Western science.
Western science believes that
if you cannot weigh something,
measure it, and counted it,
then it simply does not exist.
It's not there.
They must be able to approach
it with their instruments.
And if they can't,
it doesn't exist.
It's an illusion.
Shamans review things
quite differently.
They believe that,
whether we like it
or not, whether we
agree with it or not,
we are tied up with
a spiritual realm.
And if we wish to deal with
problems in this physical
world, then we cannot
ignore that spiritual realm.
And often the root
cause of problems
will be in that spiritual realm.
So rather than sticking
their heads in the sand
and pretending that it doesn't
exist, what shamans attempt
to do is to become
masters of that realm.
They develop techniques for
altering their consciousness
at will.
And the most widely
used technique
is the use of
hallucinogenic plants.
But there are other
techniques as well.
And they enter the other realm.
And they master it.
And they deal with and negotiate
with the spirits there.
And they frequently bring
back useful information
of great value in
this physical world,
particularly to do with healing.
>>And isn't this
being validated now
in the world of quantum physics?
Michio Kaku's book "Parallel
Worlds," for example.
>>Absolutely.
>>They may not be
extending themselves yet
into what that experience looks
like, but certainly are now
validating that these
other dimensions do exist.
So at least we're
getting a little bit
of a scientific bridge
there, aren't we?
>>Most definitely.
This is a bridge, which helps
people in Western culture
to understand what's
going on here.
Because now, for the first
time, thanks to quantum physics,
which really only
goes back to the 1920s
or so-- thanks to
quantum physics
and the insights and
discoveries of quantum physics,
most people are aware
that the existence
of parallel dimensions is
a very real possibility.
Quantum physicists have
powerful experimental evidence,
indirect evidence, to suggest
that these parallel dimensions
exist.
And one of the big
projects of quantum physics
is to crack open the
parallel dimensions,
to find a way into them.
And that's what the largest
scientific instrument
on the planet, the Large
Hadron Collider in Switzerland,
is partly about, a
multi-billion dollar instrument
designed to explore
parallel dimensions.
Well, that's what
shamans have been
doing for tens of
thousands of years.
They've been exploring
parallel dimensions.
And they call them
spirit worlds.
And they don't need
a gigantic instrument
buried under
Switzerland to do it.
They use the power of their
own minds, the power that
is inherent in their own brains.
And perhaps what
they're doing is
re-tuning the receiver
wavelength of the brain.
We need to think of the brain
as a receiver of information,
as a receiver of consciousness.
And perhaps what they're doing
is re-tuning the receiver
wavelength so that
it shifts them off,
shall we call it, channel
normal, and puts them
into another channel where the
information that they receive
is real and is valid, but
is not accessible to us
in normal states
of consciousness.
>>Interestingly, the
shamanic traditions
seem to bring forth, as
you have said before,
a lot of the same
imagery, et cetera.
But I have also read that, in
your understanding of this,
this might also have given
birth to the inspirations that
became our modern religions.
>>Yes.
I think there's no
doubt about this.
If you go back to the source
of any of the great religions,
you are going to find
shamanic experiences.
Now, I realize that
this may cause offense.
And I don't wish to
offend Christians.
I would just ask Christians
to review this information
with an open mind.
St. Paul and his
Damascus road experience
is of fundamental
importance to Christianity
and to the development and
spread of Christianity.
What St. Paul
experienced there was
a classic shamanic
experience, a blinding light
and the sense of a complete
change of his life,
of a whole new flood of
information came into his mind.
And from that, much of
the spread of Christianity
owes its strength.
Christ himself is a
powerfully shamanic figure.
Many shamans, most shamans,
around the world today
believe that they are partly
from the spiritual realm,
that they may have a mother or
a father in the spiritual realm,
and that they are
connected to this world
and to the spirit world.
And of course Christ is
the same kind of figure.
He's partly divine and partly
human, part spirit, part man.
So I think the connections are
very clear and very obvious
there.
Now, the problem is that we
can find this in all religions.
In the case of the
Mormons, for example,
what does Joseph Smith
encounter but an angelic being,
a supernatural being,
who presents to him
certain texts on golden tablets.
The case of Mani,
the Manichean faith--
he also had almost
identical experiences.
You can repeat this story
again and again in religions.
At the very source and
heart of the religion
is a profound experience
that an individual
or a group of individuals
had in an altered state
of consciousness.
But then what happens is that
the classic, bureaucratic
structures of humanity
begin to impose themself
on that original experience.
And within a few
generations, the religion
has moved away from direct
experience of the spirit realm
and has substituted
a class of priests
in between us and
the spirit world.
And those priests are
generally motivated entirely
by this-world concerns.
And religion then
becomes an instrument
of material
oppression and control
and is co-opted by the
political establishment, when,
in fact, at the
heart of the religion
is a direct experience
of another world.
>>And those are relegated
by this time to myth.
>>Those are relegated to myth.
And, in fact, you'll find
that many religions, as they
develop, turn against
the notion that those
who follow the religion
should experience
altered states of consciousness.
Many relations are
vehemently opposed
to altered states
of consciousness,
even though their own
validity derives originally
from an altered state
of consciousness.
But this is a normal process.
This is what human beings do.
Human beings are power animals.
And any structure can
be co-opted to the power
interests of particular groups.
And that's unfortunately what
has happened with religions.
And the great world religions
today are all, in my view,
very far removed from
their shamanic roots,
greatly to their cost.
>>So let's go back to
your personal experience.
What happened when you first had
your experience with ayahuasca?
>>Well, I should add that
ayahuasca is not the only
shamanic plant that
I've worked with.
I've also worked with
ibogaine from Central Africa.
I've worked with psilocybin,
sacred mushrooms,
from around the world.
And I've worked with DMT in its
pure form, derived from plants.
>>Were there any commonalities
to the experience?
>>Yes.
There were extraordinary
commonalities
to these experiences,
some differences as well.
And what this suggests to me is
that there are multiple realms
out there and that perhaps
different substances put us
in tune, put us on to the
right receiver wavelength
for different realms.
But in every case, it is an
absolutely convincing encounter
with another level of reality.
And this encounter
takes two forms.
For me, if I consider
the ayahuasca experience,
if we focus in on
that, it was rather
like traveling
for the first time
to another country, a
wonderful country filled
with extraordinary
sights and sounds,
filled with beings with
great wisdom and intelligence
who wish to communicate with me.
But first of all, I had to
learn the rules of that realm.
I had to learn it
and discover it
just as I would have to learn
the rules of a new country
here on earth if I
went to that country.
>>So how did you
experience these new rules?
After you'd been throwing up.
>>Yeah.
Well, this is the problem.
First of all, you have to deal
with the physical consequences
of ayahuasca and then come
back into the visionary states.
And sometimes the
physical consequences
come back three or four
times during a session.
So it's a constant interruption.
But at the same time, the
visions always return.
Altogether across
the 11 sessions
that I did in the Amazon, I was
feeling towards the end of it
that I was beginning to
get genuine communication,
that information was coming to
me, that I was understanding.
It's not that these beings
speak in human voices.
The communication is telepathic.
But still, one has to
overcome one's fear, one's
preconceptions,
one's ideas of what's
going on in order
to listen to that
and hear it and understand
what's being said.
Interestingly, part of the
ayahuasca experience for me
was a personal,
inward journey, where
I found myself confronted with
absolute clarity and no hiding
place with many
things that I had
done during the
course of my life,
going right back
to my childhood,
which I wasn't
proud of and which
I had kind of shoved
away from memory.
>>Like little life review.
>>It was like a life review,
very much a life review.
And the purpose of that
life review-- and I
know many other people who
have drunk ayahuasca who
have had the same experience.
The purpose of that
life review seems
to be to allow you
to change track
if you want to change track,
instead of being just rooted
in the way that
you've always been.
It gives you a
vision of yourself
in very unflattering terms.
And you realize your motives
for a certain act of meanness
or a certain act of dishonesty.
And you can't hide
from it anymore.
And once you realize
that, of course you
know that you can't go
back and change the past,
but you also know
that you don't have
to be that way
again in the future.
So I did find it a profound
teaching experience
in that respect, just at a
level of personal development.
But at the broader
level, my sense
is that there is an
enormous amount of extremely
valid and valuable
information that
was beamed at me
from this other world
and that I need to
do more work to get
clear exactly what
is being said.
And for that reason, I intend
to persist with ayahuasca.
And I'm going to go
back to Brazil next year
and spend a couple of weeks,
again, working with shamans
and drinking ayahuasca.
Because I want to explore
that other country further,
more carefully, over an
extended period of time.
>>Are you at liberty
to share some
of what you experience
there that you're
continuing your exploration?
>>Well, as I say, the
experience is primarily
one of an extraordinary
source of information,
which can help me
as an individual,
and which may have a much
broader relevance to that,
but which I need to
learn how to decode.
And that's why I compare
it with traveling
to another country, which
is full of rich experiences,
but first of all I have
to learn the language
if I'm going to communicate
with the people there at all.
>>So is it given
to you in the form
of, in your personal experience,
more in the form of symbols,
or, as you say,
these beings that
morph from animal to human?
>>Very frequently, I encountered
beings exactly like those
painted on the walls
of the painted caves,
which are part animal and
part human, one particular--
>>Like in Egypt.
And one particularly
powerful such vision
involved a creature that
was had the body of a human
and the head of a
crocodile or an alligator.
And indeed there is an Egyptian
god who looks like that.
I found myself, my
consciousness at any rate,
in a darkened room
of what seemed
to be some huge building.
And there was a doorway.
And through the doorway,
light was streaming.
And out through the doorway,
I could see a balcony,
and beyond that, an
enormous expanse of water.
It wasn't clear to me if it
was a sea or a great river.
And I thought that I would
move forward through the room
and come to that doorway
and see what lay beyond it.
And you can do that
with ayahuasca, you
can project your consciousness
in the direction that you want.
So I came to the doorway.
And then I looked to my right.
And I saw a huge what I took
to be a statue of a powerfully
built man with the
head of a crocodile.
It seemed to be carved
out of green jade.
And then just at the moment that
I had decided it was a statute,
the eyes of the figure
swiveled towards me.
And it glanced at me
with a look that I
can describe as sly and
appraising but not threatening.
It was reacting to me.
And at that moment,
I became very afraid.
And the fear caused me to
withdraw from the experience,
open my eyes, and
shut out the visions.
This happened to me a few times.
And that's why I
want to go back.
Because I feel I have
to overcome that fear,
that it's very important
to learn to overcome
fear in order to get the maximum
value out of these experiences.
>>And it seems that
a lot of people
encounter this same type of fear
when they have this experience.
And the same types of images
come up, such as the serpent.
>>Yes.
The serpent is absolutely
universal in ayahuasca.
I don't know anybody
who's drunk ayahuasca who
hasn't encountered serpents.
There may be some rare
individuals who haven't.
But the vast majority of us do.
And these serpents
are not-- you know,
some might argue that we have
a primordial fear of snakes.
And that that's why in an
altered state of consciousness,
we see them.
This is complete nonsense.
The serpents that are seen
under the influence of ayahuasca
are not threatening.
They are not dangerous.
They are not violent.
They are intelligent beings,
often of enormous scale,
50 or 100 feet long.
They seem huge,
with gigantic heads
and bright, intelligent eyes.
And again, they
want to talk to you.
>>Do they have a similar
message or representation
to most people in this state?
>>Well, that varies.
I know one individual, the Swiss
anthropologist Jeremy Narby,
who went to the Amazon
also to drink ayahuasca,
who felt very much that
he was put in his place
by two of these serpent beings.
They said to him,
get it straight.
You are just a human being.
>>>>[LAUGHS] Well,
with all of your work
in the past and your
runaway best seller book
"Fingerprints of the
Gods," where you're
looking at mankind being far
more evolved in times past
than we have given
us credit for,
and being able to have overhead
views of the cartography
of the planet, for example,
that were really inexplicable,
have you found that the
work you're doing now,
going into these
other dimensions,
is somehow merging
with or validating
or somehow aligning with the
work you've done previously?
>>Yes, definitely.
For example, the ancient
Egyptians and the ancient Maya,
two cultures that I
spent a lot of time
studying over the
last 10 to 15 years,
I've now realized that there was
something about their cultures
that I didn't understand
and I do understand it now.
And that is that their entire
approach to spirituality
and to religion
and to the mystery
of what it is to be
alive was mediated
through altered states
of consciousness.
Both of these cultures used
altered states of consciousness
to explore the realms beyond.
And I do believe that
there are realms beyond
and that this is why these
experiences are so important.
And the shaman are right.
We mustn't cut ourselves
off from this world.
We have to know about it.
It's vitally important
for us to know about it.
I think it played a huge role
in the incredible success
of ancient Egyptian
civilization, these experiences
and altered states
of consciousness.
The ancient Egyptians
devoted their best minds
for 3,000 years to exploring the
mystery of life beyond death.
That's what they were
really interested in,
what happens to us when we die.
And the ancient Egyptians
had an answer to that.
And that is the answer that
shamans all around the world
find, that there is a journey
that we must make after death,
and that in that
journey, we must confront
the consequences of the
lives that we have lived.
It's possible that
these experiences
that shamans undergo
and that we can undergo
in altered states
of consciousness--
that any human being,
it's our birthright
to undergo these
experiences-- may
be a vital preparation for what
happens to us beyond death,
that we may be able to
orient and prepare ourselves
for that transition
and that we may
be able to do so in this life.
>>And in the interim, you made a
comment at the end of your talk
today about-- it was, we need
to take our consciousness back
into our own hands.
>>I do feel very, very
strongly that we do.
>>It's been co-opted by the
media and by everything else.
>>Well, yes.
First of all, on the input
side, Western civilization
has taken control of the
consciousness of billions
of people through the
medium of television,
projecting the ethic
of Western culture.
The consumerist, materialist
ethic is beamed at us 24 hours
a day on our TV channels.
And secondly, on the other
side, Western culture
has criminalized and
demonized all experiences
involving altered
states of consciousness
and any substances that put
us into an altered state
of consciousness.
And this is clearly a war over
consciousness that's going on.
It's clear that
our societies have
an investment in preventing
us from exploring where
altered states of
consciousness will lead us.
Perhaps there's a
deep fear that if we
do explore those altered
states of consciousness,
we will not accept
the power structures
and the fairytale illusion
of material wealth
that we're all brought up
to pursue as though that's
the only thing to existence.
Suppose that the ancient
Egyptians and other cultures
like that were right.
Suppose they were right, that
it's really vital, absolutely
vital, for us and for
our eternal destiny, what
we do in this life.
And then consider
the predicament
of billions of highly
intelligent people
who are lulled into
a state of sleep
by this consciousness bomb of
television, which is constantly
being beamed at
them and who are not
allowed to explore the mysteries
of their own consciousness
using the techniques of shamans
that shamans have developed
for thousands of years using
the plant hallucinogens.
We are simply not
allowed to do that.
And if we do that, then we are
considered to be criminals.
And we are stigmatized
by our society.
And we are put in prison.
This is a reversion to the world
of the Spanish Inquisition.
If I, as an individual, am
not sovereign over my own
consciousness, if I cannot
decide what to do with
my consciousness, which
is the heart of my being,
then I am not free.
And I need not talk
about freedom or living
in a free society or
such issues as democracy
if my society will not
allow me to explore
my own consciousness.
And that is the problem
that we live in today,
that our societies hate
the idea of exploring
altered states of consciousness
and use every power structure
that they have to prevent
that from happening.
If, in an altered
state of consciousness,
my behavior is disruptive
in the public arena,
then that behavior
should rightly
be controlled by society.
But a personal and
private exploration
of our own consciousness is
our own business, in my view,
and is not the
business of the state.
>>Graham's work in this field
of altered consciousness
is chronicled in his book
"Supernatural, Meetings
with the Ancient
Teachers of Mankind."
Another of our speakers,
Dr. Stanislav Grof,
also experienced altered
states of consciousness
through LSD in his medical
training five decades ago.
He was ultimately
led to his insights
on holotropic breathwork.
I think you'll find his
story fascinating as well.
Until next time,
thanks for watching.